Agile Development - How to be a better developer

Agile Intro

    This is a specific form of development and is currently the most used version across the world
    As the name implies this is a form of development that is flexible so that it can be used for any project
    This form of development focuses very heavily on the user experience and client collaboration

Agile values:

Individuals and Interactions
    Instead of just focusing on the project and what needs to be done you can focus on the team and how they do it
    If you have a happy team and they are all working together very well then the product will turn out better
    This also goes with the client, if you have a good relationship with the customer the project has a better chance for success

Working Software
    While testing and creating your project you should make it avaliable to everyone
    Many older companies would spend their time creating rendered images of the site and typing up instructions on how to use the site
    You should instead have it up so that people can see and use it while push out consistent updates

Customer collaboration
    By keeping constant communication with the client and customers you can ensure that you are creating what they want to recieve and what will be best for the users
    This will also avoid large changes or unfortunate miscommunications at the end of the project

Responding to change
    Unlike other forms of design, agile is based around the idea that at any point the entire project and scope can change
    People's needs, modern design, software, and the team you are working with change constantly and your project needs to be able to change with all of that

The Agile Principles

These are 12 commandments while working on your SDLC and you better believe this will be on your test in some capacity

1. Your highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and continuous delivery of valuable software
2. Welcome changing requirements, even late in development. Agile processes harness change for the customer's competitive advantage
3. Deliver working software frequently, from a couple of weeks to a couple of month, and as needed
4. Business people and developers must work together daily throughout the project
5. Build projects arounf motivated individuals. Give them the enviornment and support they need, and trust them to get the job done
6. The most efficient and effective method of conveying information to and within a development team is face-to-face coversion
7. Working software is the primary measure of progress
8. Agile Processes promote sustainable development. The sponsors, developers, and users should be able to maintain a constant pace indefinetely
9. Continous attention to technical excellence and good design enhances agility
10.
11.
12.
